Hi friends in this video
Let us discuss about void pointers
So a void pointer is a general
purpose pointer
A normal pointer can store the address of its own
datatype variable
Or we can say it can point to variable of
its own
data type. An integer pointer can point to
an integer variable
A character pointer can point a character variable
An integer pointer cannot point to a variable of another
data type. That is normal
pointers can't point to address of different data type. But
a void pointer can point to any variable
Here we have void
pointer ptr
It can point to integer variable i as well as
character
Variable c
Assigning a variable address to a pointer is called Referencing
& is the reference operator
So what is dereferencing? Dereferencing is directly accessing
the value of the variable instead of its memory address
* or asterisk is the dereferencing operator. See this
programme. We have integer variable i equal to 10
and character variable c equal to a
Now we create two pointers one integer pointer iptr
and one character pointer cptr
iptr stores address of i. So when we print * or
valued at iptr the compiler exactly knows it is an
integer pointer
So it reads four bytes of data from the base
address and we get 10. cptr stores address of c
So when we print *cptr or value at cptr the
compiler exactly knows it is a character pointer
So it reads one byte of data from the base
address and we get a. Now how do we
dereference a void pointer?
See this programme. We have integer variable i equal to 10
and character variable c equal to a.
Next we have a void pointer ptr and it is assigned
with address of i.
Now we print the value of ptr or *ptr
using %d format specifier and what will
be the output ?
Will it be 10? No! we will get an error
because it does in know which data type it is referring
so we can't dereference void pointer.
Now ptr is assigned with address of c, so it will
store 2024
Now we print the value at ptr or
*ptr using %c format specifier and again
what will be the output? Again
the same problem is here and we will get the
error. Here
the major issue is that while referencing it, the compiler
doesn't know how many bytes to read. That is if it
is a character type compiler reads one byte
If it is an integer or float type
compiler reads four bytes and so on
But for void type, this information is not known
So what is the solution to this issue? We need
to typecast the void pointer into the required datatype.
before dereferencing. See here we typecast to integer
So compiler will understand that this is an integer type
and reads four bytes. So it will correctly print the
value 10.
Now we store the address of c to ptr and
before we print we typecast it to character
So compiler will read one byte and we get
the correct output a
Now let us discuss about the applications of void pointers
The best application is the malloc function and
malloc is a generic function which is used to allocate
dynamic memory of any data type
It will allocate dynamic memory and returned a void pointer since
void is a generic pointer
We can assign it to any data type like
integer, character, float etcetera
If we don't have void pointer and if we want
to allocate dynamic memory for integer pointer then we
should have function like
malloc int and it's return type
must be int *
If we want to allocate dynamic memory for character pointer
then we should have function like malloc char and it's
returned type as char*
Similarly for float pointer we should have malloc float
function similarly for all other types
We need different malloc functions but we can create one
generic malloc function using void * as return type.
we can use this generic function to allocate dynamic memory
for any data type as malloc function returns void *
We need to typecast it to the require type
But in C, typecasting is done explicitly by the compiler
This is how we can use a pointer to create
a generic function or programme which will work for any
data type
Now let us discuss about pointer arithmetic
on void pointers, we can't perform void pointer arithmetic on
standard C like Microsoft Visual C because in standard C
the size of void is unknown and it will throw
the following error
We can't perform void pointer arithmetic on GCC as the
size of the void is one
However we can perform void pointer arithmetic on
standard C by typecasting it into the required data type.
So that's all and thank you for watching this video